differentiable as many times as you like
and the derivative
at 0
equals
for all n
okay
so what do i bring this up because then
the taylor polynomial
for this function that i've written here
at 0
so this is
the taylor polynomial at 0
just equals again the sum of the
derivatives evaluated at 0
times x minus 0 to the k but all the
derivatives are 0
and thus
the function is in fact equal to the
remainder term
near zero so you see the remainder term
carries all of f so it doesn't
necessarily need to be small
okay
and what i'm trying to say is that in
general you can't just throw away this
remainder term and expect that to be
um
even near the point x some sort of
faithful um
representation of the function just by
the taylor polynomial because as we see
for this function the taylor polynomial
is identically zero if i throw away the
remainder term i would be saying f is
zero but it most certainly is not near x
equals zero
okay
so that was the point of
that discussion
so now let's uh give the proof
and as you see we're just going to kind
of apply the mean value theorem um
repeatedly to
uh
higher derivatives of f but not
necessarily of f but of a function we
cook up out of f
so let's take two points x 0 and x
not equal to each other of course if
they're equal to each other
we can take c to be whatever we want
because then f of
uh
because then what we pick up is f of x
equals f of x on the right hand side so
we can just consider the case that
x0 does not equal x
now let m
be so this is just a number
depending on x
and f zero
over x minus x zero
to the n plus one
okay
so
p sub n this is again the taylor
polynomial of degree n
uh f of x minus p sub n of x over x
minus x sub zero so this is just a
number depending on x and x zero
then uh just rewriting this this means
that
f of x
is equal to p sub n of x the taylor
polynomial of n at x
plus m x times
m x
x 0
times x minus x sub zero over n to the n
plus one okay so now the goal
is to show that in fact this number can
be written
as
uh the n plus one derivative evaluated
at some point over n plus one factorial
okay
so now the goal
shows there exists a c
and a b
such that
m x
equals f
n plus one over c
over n plus one
factorial
okay
okay so now
what is uh
you know what is this defining
characteristic of this taylor polynomial
at uh
this nth order taylor polynomial
evaluate
with respect to x0 well
the point is is that this taylor
polynomial agrees with f at x 0
up to nth order up to n derivatives okay
in other words if i take
the kth derivative
of f and evaluated at x0
this is the same as taking
the kth derivative of the taylor
polynomial and
evaluating it at x0 so the taylor
polynomial agrees with f up to n
derivatives at the point x zero
all right so again this is
the whole point of taylor polynomials is
that they
at least at the point agree with f
to nth order
okay
doesn't mean they agree with f or even
are a good representation of f away from
x0 like we just saw but at least at x0
they're
agree with f
okay
so now i'm going to define a new
function
which i'm going to start applying uh the
mean value theorem too
and hopefully come up with
this c
it's g of s equals f of s minus p sub n
of s minus this number from earlier
times
s minus x zero to the n plus one
okay
and something to note is that this
function here
so
this uh
whole function
so g
uh first off f is n plus one times
differentiable this is a polynomial so
it's n plus one times differentiable and
this is just just a polynomial also in s
so it's
n plus one times differentiable
so ns
okay
so let me uh
let me draw a picture
so we have x0 and x at least in the
picture x is bigger than x0 but that
doesn't really matter so
what do we know about
g of x0 well
this is equal to f
and now when i stick in x 0 here
uh i get 0 so
and now f of x 0 minus p n of x 0 again
by this first thing here
for k equals 0 this is equal to 0.
okay
and now what do i know about g evaluated
at x
this is equal to f of x minus p n of x
remember the the
variable that i'm changing or at least
the free variable there is s so if i
stick in x i get
f of x minus p n of x minus m
this
constant from earlier
which i chose depending on x and x zero
but using this relation here
this is zero
okay
so i have that the function g
at x 0 and at x
is 0.
so by the mean value theorem or rolls
theorem
so by mean value theorem
there exists a point x1
between
x0x such that
g prime of x1
equals 0.
now remember at x0
or g prime of x one equals zero now at x
zero
uh we have that
so okay so at g prime of x one
uh
so at x one g prime is zero
but also so
if i look at the derivative of g at x 0
this is equal to f prime of x 0 minus p
n
prime of x 0
minus
now here i'm working under the sum so
just for
illustration purposes i'm assuming n is
uh
you know n is say bigger than 2
bigger than or equal to 2 at least from
what i'm writing down right now but if i
take the derivative of this and set in
and plug in x0
then i will also get 0 here so i just
get f prime of x0 minus pn prime of zero
so this equals zero yeah so i have
um g prime of x one equals zero g prime
of x is
zero equals zero
and therefore by the mean value theorem
applied again
there exists
a point x2
between
x
and x0
such that
the second derivative of g
evaluated at x2
equals 0.
okay and now i just iterate this right
because i still know
at x0
the second derivative of g is also 0
as long as n is bigger than or equal to
bigger than or equal to 2.
and then i'll get that there's a
so there's x1
here
so let me write here at this point we
know
g equals 0 g prime equals 0
and so on at this point
g prime equals 0 and then at x2
right so then the fact that g double
prime here at this point is zero
and at zero here we apply the mean value
theorem again and we get a point x three
in between them where now the third
derivative equals 0 and we can keep
going on up until a certain point
and what point is that that's when i've
taken away n derivatives here and all
that i have left here is s minus x0
so
let me summarize
continuing in this way
we see there exists
you see
for all
k between 0 and n
there exists
an x
sub k
between
x 0 and x
such that the kth derivative
at
x sub k
equals 0.
okay
so in particular at the end plus at the
k equals end stage uh what do i have so
um
x 0
x and
there's x sub n
so i'm just now going to repeat this
argument one last time and we'll see
where that leads us
since
g
the nth derivative of g evaluated at
x sub zero equals zero again this is
coming from
this relation here
so let me in fact write that again
this is equal to
f of x0
minus
pn of x0 and i'll even
write out
this is equal to
m x
x 0 n plus 1
factorial times
x 0 minus x 0. this is what happens when
i take n derivatives
of ns of this monomial here
so this of course is zero
equals 0.
so since we have that
and
we have its
equals 0 at this other point
there exists
by the mean value theorem now applied to
g sub n g
uh the nth derivative of g so
when i write mean value theorem here i'm
not applying it to the function g i'm
applying it to
the derivative
so here i was applying it just to g
here i was applying the mean value
theorem to the derivative of g
okay
and here i'm now applying the mean value
theorem to the nth derivative
of g
so let me make that perfectly clear
there exists a number c
between
x and x0
such that
the n plus one the derivative of g
uh the derivative of the nth order
derivative of g so the n plus first
derivative of g
of c equals zero but what does this mean
um
now if i take n plus 1 derivatives
with respect to s
of this
over here
[Applause]
i get f
now if i take n plus 1 derivatives of
an int degree polynomial i get 0 right
if i take two derivatives of a degree
one polynomial of just
which is just x i get zero if i take
three derivatives of a degree two
polynomial i get zero uh
so um
i get 0 for when i differentiate n plus
1 times
an nth degree polynomial minus
m this constant again
times n plus 1 derivatives
of
this
monomial here in s
so remember all these derivatives i'm
writing down here these are all in terms
of s okay
um times n plus 1
factorial and this equals 0.
right this is just
this here
expressed here
and this should be c i'm sorry
we're plugging in
c
but that means precisely
that
which is what i
wanted to show existed all right so at
this point c
uh
this
constant from earlier
which remember was defined in this way
is actually equal to the n plus one
derivative of f evaluated at some c so
and therefore f of x
is equal to p n of x
plus
c times
where c is between x and x 0.
okay
[Applause]
so
again the the ta you know taylor's
theorem
uh
you know
says a couple of things but it doesn't
say
certain things right um
you know the mean value theorem as it's
written says there exists some point in
between so that uh
um
you know the secant line from f of b to
f of a
is equal to the derivative of the
function tangent to the graph at some
point in between
but it doesn't you know
tell you that
you know the function near a point can
necessarily
what am i trying to say
okay so what taylor's theorem does say
is that
um you can iterate the mean value
theorem for higher order derivatives but
what it doesn't say is that um this
polynomial that you get over here which
you interpret you know kind of as an
approximation of the function f
near x0
it doesn't say that that approximation
in this is necessarily good right
because we just saw from this example
that that remainder term may end up
being the entire function
okay
um
but still that doesn't uh
you know that's
still doesn't make it any less useful in
applications
okay so
let's give a simple application of
taylor's theorem
which
perhaps
you uh
you know
had endless pro you know
homework problems or
exam problems on when you
back when you first took calculus and
you know we're finding critical points
and trying to characterize them as
relative minimums or relative maximums
we have the second derivative test which
states the following
which states that
suppose
i have a function from the open interval
a b to r
and
suppose this has two
continuous
derivatives
on this open interval a b
if
at a point in a b
the derivative equals zero
and
the second derivative of f
evaluated at 0
x sub 0 is positive
then
f has
a
relative min
at x zero
okay and i should say that this is a
strict relative min
what's the difference between a strict
relative men and just a relative min a
strict relative mean men i mean that if
i'm at any point other than x0
and i'm nearby
then uh f of x is bigger than f of x
zero okay
so let me just write that here that
means
near x0
okay
in fact uh let's
just briefly recall what
the definition of relative men is and
this will allow me to to state what it
means to be a strict
relative min this means
there exists
a delta positive
such that
for all x
in
such that for all x
x minus x 0
implies f of x
is bigger than
f of x0
okay
so this is the definition of strict
relative men
a strict relative min is a relative min
because
um what's the only thing missing
from the definition of relative men is
what happens if i evaluated x zero and
then
at x zero we get f of x zero equals f of
x zero so
a strict relative min is a relative min
but it's a little bit stronger because
it's saying that as long as x is not
equal to x0 meaning this thing is bigger
than zero f of x is bigger than f of x
zero not bigger than or equal to
okay
[Applause]
all right so i hate doing this but the
theorem stated over there
and now we need to go across the room to
do the proof
all right so
f has two continuous derivatives um
on a b
and therefore the second derivative is
continuous at x zero
so since the second derivative is
continuous
we get that the limit as x goes to x0
or let me put
instead of x
let's say c uh this equals f double
prime of x0
which is positive right by assumption
that's that's what we're assuming
um
and therefore
by an exercise in one of the assignments
since this limit
this implies that there exists
a delta 0 positive such that
for all
0 bigger than c bigger than x0
and in fact we can include
so
um
let me see there exists delta zero
positive such that
uh
for all c
satisfying
we get that
f prime of c
is positive right so
all i'm saying is we have this point x 0
x 0 plus delta 0
x 0 minus delta 0
and then
on this interval
f double prime of c
is positive
all right you prove that
in fact in
an assignment if the limit of a function
as i approach a point equals
l which is positive then
near the point the function has to be
positive
okay
so now i have to verify that
what am i trying to do i'm trying to
verify that i have a strict relative
minimum so that there exists a delta i
have this delta 0
which ensures that the second derivative
is positive on this interval
so i say choose delta to be this delta 0
and now i have to show that this delta
works meaning for all x
in that
satisfying that inequality
i have
f of x is bigger than f of x 0.
so
taking x
between delta
i mean
within delta distance to x0
so here's
x
say
then by taylor's theorem
there exists a c
between x
and x 0.
so
here's x
there's this point c between x and x 0.
um which i can always choose strictly in
between them
such that
i have that f of x
equals
so
f of x 0
plus
f prime of x 0 times
c minus x 0
plus
no this should be x sorry plus f double
prime of c over 2 times
x minus x 0 squared
okay
now
at the funk at x0 the derivative is
assumed to be zero right we're assuming
the derivative vanishes at x zero
and um the second derivative is positive
there so this equals
f of x zero plus f prime of c over 2
times x minus x 0 squared
now
on this whole interval which is where
i'm looking at
f double prime of c is positive so this
thing here is positive
and
as long as x minus x0 is not 0 as long
as x is not equal to x0 this thing is
positive this is a square
so this is strictly bigger than
f of x 0 which is what i wanted to prove
right
so
i have proven that
f of x is bigger than f x 0 on
this interval here
all right
so of course
you know the picture that goes along
with this
is something like
you know let's say the point x zero is
zero at least near
uh this point uh the derivative is zero
the second derivative is positive so
this is how the function should look
okay
okay so that
uh concludes what we're going to say
about
uh differentiation
um you know i have
put in the assignment you know
kind of the most useful version of
l'hopital's rule
uh which is kind of the
only other main thing we're missing
right now
from just the theory of
differentiation um
but remember you know kind of
differentiation is a
bit of a miracle as i've said before
because
there exists continuous functions
and never have a derivative
integration which we're which is what
we're moving on to now
is not so much of a miracle
because
as we'll show
every continuous function has
a riemann integral
which is a different limiting process so
all of these things we're talking about
you know all of these notions continuity
is a
notion that involves limits
differentiation is
a process involving limits
and integration is a process involving
limits but somehow integration is not as
harsh a process as differentiation
okay
okay so
we're moving on now to
riemann
should say the
riemann integral but i'll say right
riemann integration
and so what is riemann integration
it is
you know you were told this in calculus
but maybe in not so careful away
this is a theory of what it means or
this is a
number that we associate to a function
that you interpret as the area
underneath the curve
okay
it is not
as maybe you're told
somehow magically equal to the area
underneath the curve
there is no notion of area underneath
the curve
all right the riemann integral
is a number which you interpret as the
area underneath the curve because it
agrees with what you think the area
underneath the curve should be for
simple
examples for example a half circle
or you know just a box you know these
two notions agree
and therefore you interpret the riemann
integral which is a number obtained by a
limiting process as the area underneath
the curve
it is not somehow
you know
out in the universe there is this notion
of area underneath the curve and
the riemann integral
magically coincides with that notion no
it is a theory if you like of
uh assigning a number that we interpret
as the area underneath the curve
okay
um
and it's good for
very good for um
especially once we get to the real
miracle of calculus the fundamental
theorem of calculus which connects the
derivative to integration you know it's
fantastic in
you know being able to
in its ease of computing
um
you know hopefully at some point you go
on to learn about
um
the bag integration which is a much more
versatile notion of area underneath the
curve
and a little bit more robust you have
better theorems that you can then use
and prove
prove then use of course
but uh
riemann integration is a is a place to
start and in fact
you know and one in some treatments of
lebaig integration
you know the bag integration is treated
as the completion of riemann integration
just as the real numbers are you know
the completion in some sense of the
rational numbers
okay so let's um set up
some definitions and
notions that we'll need so i'm just
going to be talking about riemann
integration of continuous functions this
is the simplest way to go
um
why not for you know some sense of
general functions or something like that
um because you know in general a
function does not have a riemann
integral
so you could try to ask
can you characterize what functions do
have a riemann integral
and the answer to that is
functions which are continuous in a
sense almost everywhere
almost everywhere though you don't know
we don't have the length we don't have
the machinery to describe that that's a
measure theory course
so
because you cannot
or at least because we don't have the
machinery to fully state what it means
a precise you know if and only if
statement about when a function is
riemann integral i'm just going to do uh
the riemann integral for continuous
functions
which is nice and simple enough
and still pretty
so
let me just introduce
for some notation that i'll be using a
lot
c of
a b this is going to be the set of all
continuous functions
from a b to r so f
maybe to r f is
continuous okay
now
so
as i said that we're going to associate
to
an interval and a function a number
which we will later interpret as
um
you know as the
as
you know a notion of area underneath the
curve
so this process is a limiting process
where we're going to be taking the
domain and cutting it up into smaller
and smaller pieces
and somehow
writing down a number
that
we think approximates the area
is a good approximate area underneath
the curve
so
i'm going to assign some words to this
breaking down process
a partition
of the interval a b
this is just a finite set
x underline
which i'll write in this way
is
so
it's a finite set
which i write x0
x1 x2 up to xn with the property that x0
is equal to a is less than x1 less than
x2
okay
the norm
of a partition
denote
with these uh two vertical lines on
either side of
x underline
is uh by definition uh
the max of the differences between these
partition points okay so i refer to
these points that are in the partition
as partition points so this is x1 minus
x0
so on xn minus xn minus 1.
a tag
for
partition x bar
is
[Applause]
finite set
xc so get used to some greek letters in
your life xc
equals c1 up to
cn so as before in the partition we
started off with a 0 here we start off
with 1
such that
each of these xc's
lie between
partition points in other words
x0 is less than xc 1 is less than
x1
okay
and the pair
is referred to as a tagged partition
okay so
although maybe it looks
a little bit fancy it's not
a partition is you take your interval a
b and you cut it up into pieces
with your first point always being a
and
your last point always being b
so
x1
x2
and
because i can't draw n points i'm going
to make
i'm going to draw
you know four points
x3 x4
so
there's a partition of a b
into
you know think of these points as
being the endpoints of little intervals
that i've broken up the bigger interval
into
and the xcs are just points in each of
these little intervals so
c1 has to land there
you know
xc 2 could land in the next one it could
actually be the end point if we'd like
xc3
let's say it's the midpoint
let's say xc4 is there
as
well uh so
you know the tag
tagged points are just lying in these
smaller intervals
okay and at least in this picture
um
you know the biggest separation between
partition points
would be
something like x3 minus x2
here
okay so the
norm of a partition
is
you know the length of the largest sub
interval
okay so you know i drew i drew kind of
something abstract here
let's make this more concrete let's say
i'm looking at
so just to
write down a few examples
let's say my interval is 1 3
and then
my partition it is
are the points 1
um
you know
3 halves
2 3
and then my set of tags
are
five fourths
just the midpoints seven fourths
five halves so
my partition is one
there's two
three halves so
so those are my partition points
and meanwhile my tags are the midpoints
so
okay and then
the norm of
this partition
is the maximum
of the lengths of these smaller sub
intervals here not the ones using c but
the one with the partition points so
max the
of
three half minus one
two minus three halves
three minus two
and
is one the length of this
sub interval okay
um
okay so
now
given a
tag
tagged partition we're going to
associate a number to this tag partition
which we interpret as an approximate
area
so
let f be a continuous function xc
a tagged partition
the riemann sum
associated to
i should say of f
the tag partition xc
is the number
s sub f
of x bar i mean x underline xc underline
which is the sum from
k equals 0 to
k equals 1 to n
of
f of x c k
times xk minus
xk minus 1.
okay
so
again what
what we interpret this number at
so how do we interpret this number we
interpret it as somehow
uh
we give meaning to this number as an
approximate area right if this is a b
and
there's a function
f and let's say
those are the partition points so x1
x2 x3 so x4
x0
and let's say
the
tag are just the right endpoints
of each of these smaller intervals
then
what is this number at least in terms of
this picture
okay
that's a little off but anyways so
what i've shaded in this area
this equals
uh this riemann sum of f associated to
um this tag here and let me
go over again
the graph of f
so
you know
this number here which
we've uh come up with
we interpret as somehow being an
approximate area
um
again i i don't like saying area
underneath the curve because that
presupposes that there is a notion of
the area underneath the curve
independent of what we're doing here but
that's not the case
we are in fact giving a theory a
mathematical theory
uh
area underneath the curve all right we
are prescribing a number which we
interpret as the area underneath the
curve so
these riemann sums we interpret as being
you know
approximate areas
all right
and so what we would like to do is
somehow take a limit
as
the lengths of these sub intervals get
smaller and smaller as the norm of the
partitions go to zero and what we would
like to say is that these approximate
areas these are just numbers
converge to some limiting number a say
that number
we refer to the riemann integral we
refer to as the riemann integral of f
and we interpret as
the area underneath the graph of f
okay
now for this to work we have to show
that
as we take partitions
with smaller and smaller norm where the
intervals get smaller and smaller
these approximate areas
actually do converge to some number
and that's going to be the content of
the next lecture
uh in which we'll prove the existence of
the riemann integral
um
and uh do some properties about but so
so the take-home point is you know
again there is no definition of area
underneath the curve
independent of what we're doing it's not
like
out there in the universe
there's a notion of the area underneath
the curve and when we compute the
riemann integral magically those two
things those two numbers coincide no
we are giving we are constructing a
theory of the area underneath the curve
which
for examples uh for example for a half
circle or square or ellipse
uh do in fact coincide with stuff you
know from
ordinary geometry okay and therefore it
gives a good
theory of area underneath the curve you
know
but
in order for us to construct that theory
or or our you know how we're
constructing that theory is for a
continuous function we define a number
associated to a partition which we
interpret as approximate areas we would
like to say these approximate areas
converge to some number
as
the partitions
get finer and finer or as the norm gets
smaller and smaller
and that limiting number we interpret as
the area underneath the curve and so
that'll be what
we do next time is actually show
the existence of this
limiting number which is the riemann
integral of f
and we'll stop there